**Chris Granner:**

You should definitely think of this response as an introduction to the guys who know this story much better than I, but I will tee them up:  DCS was brought to us, literally prior to his interviewing with us, by Matt Booty in conversations with Robin Seaver, then head of W/B/M audio. Once sufficient ground support for the idea was mustered, and once we caught Neil admitting that yes, he WOULD be willing to spend another ... $20? $40? per game on improving the sound, the team was able to kick it off. The initial work was done by a Canadian team with the unbearably cute name of Q-Branch, and if I recall correctly the original version of the core compression code was known as Vlad. (No relation or reference to Python, RIP...) 

Matt wrote the primary tool used to prepare sound for DCS as well as v1 of the meta-code and the design of the audio meta-data that was integrated & burned into EPROM (& subsequent storage mechs). Rich and his chum Will modified & improved the core compression algorithm over at least a couple of iterations (Joe, Henry), and Henry was the current system when I left WMS in 1995.  This was a wild time, a layer of awesomeness that absolutely has to be tasted as part of the epic cake that was WMS between 1990 & 1995...and Rich and (especially) Matt are the right guys to tell it in more detail; Matt, of course, was around for every subsequent iteration and could provide chapter & verse on both the full inception story and the conclusion of the DCS era (which I assume was present in some form at least until P2K).

**Rich Karstens:**

I think Chris is too demure by far -- he was a big part of all the major transformations in arcade audio systems on California Ave.  I'll expand a little as I have some time presently.  I would think that between Eugene, Chris and Matt, you should have all the arcana you need re: audio, but I'll fill in a few gaps and maybe set up a base timeline (going backwards).

DCS was a Robin Seaver / Matt Booty conception in the early 90s, the idea began to include mid-fi, mono audio waveforms in games in lieu of the 4 voice FM synth stuff we'd been running width.  The Canadian company that did the initial work was QSound and they produced an audio system that did the job (for the most part).  Matt can fill in details on number of tracks etc.  I recall that there was some disappointment in the overall data rate and quality, but to give them credit, it did work and was a viable sound system.

Anyway, the tool used to compress the audio to a form that could be included in the sound ROMs was 'vlad'.  This was the QSound provided tool.  I had done some work on Hi-Fi audio data compression, so Matt and Chris asked if I'd take a look at getting the results to a) sound better and b) be smaller, i.e. cost less. A guy named Will Morrell and I worked on it for a few months and created 'joe' and then 'henry' when I added in some further improvements.  In the end it sounded better and the sounds took up less space.  I wouldn't exactly say it sounded good w/ economically viable settings, but there you go.  It could sound good w/ say 3 to 1 compression, but wasn't great at 6 to 1.  By comparison, MP2 (pre-MP3) barely sounded reasonable at 8 to 1 and used an immense amount of processing to decode.
To sum up, the DCS system was a cheap audio transform CODEC that ran on a small DSP in real-time and sounded um, 'not bad'.  A big improvement over what came before in many ways (if not all ways).  Given that a 20MB hard drive was $100 in this period, these types of audio machinations were required. With the extreme dropping of price on storage they soon became essentially relics of the past.
AFAIK, Matt and Ed Keenan shepherded DCS along for a fair amount of time, into the hard drive age, etc.  They can provide more color.
Before DCS, there was this monster FM synth based system that was written mostly by Bill Parod w/ support from Chris and myself.  You typed in your notes in text macros that got 'assembled' into the song structure.  These are the 'fields of the Lord' in which Chris (among others) played.  Most sound effects were also created via this synth.  The system was very sophisticated (for its time) and had all the current bells and whistles needed to make a seamless audio game package.  I wouldn't call it easy to use, but it could (and did) produce some of the finest arcade music ever produced, IMO.

Again, for the Yamaha system, CG is your man.  Not sure where Bill Parod ended up.

Somebody should probably talk about the speech production systems -- maybe me. 

Anyway, before DCS, where you could just record a rather faithfully reproduced voice recording, we had a low bit-rate ADPCM system on board. I did the first platform to use this -- I think it was George Petro's Terminator 2 video.  That was 8 KHz sample rate, so could, in fact, sound like a human voice (or Arnold as a terminator).
Prior to that, we used this god-awful CVSD system invented in the seventies.  It can sound reasonable at high bit rates (BTW, it's a 1 bit per sample system), but naturally we ran it a 22KHz or something.  Abs. garbage.  And known for its failure to reproduce high frequencies which botched many phonemes, mostly fricatives and plosives.  Who could forget the famous line "Bite the Road Kings". Should be 'Fight" if you don't get the inside joke.  We carried (literally) around a disk full of good consonants which we'd drop into the waveforms to help this CVSD crap reproduce the letters / phonemes, 'T', 'P', 'K', 'S', 'Sh', and  'F'. 

I could go on, esp. about our continual quest to achieve any type of breaking glass sound through this CVSD horror.  CG can probably recount the time we trashed the studio breaking 100 back glasses.  Such a mess and nothing good came from it.
And, if you could impose on Eugene, he could describe the algorithmic stuff that happened on System 9 (or 7, or whatever) just before I came on the scene.  I.e., before the Yamaha system, all SFX had to be programmed in assembler in a big loop.  Those were def. the days.

**Matt Booty:**

A few fun bits to add here...

DCS started out as a prototype / proof of concept put together using an Akai rack mount sampler -- pretty sure it was an Akai S1000 -- loaded up with sound effects, speech and music loops. It had 32MB of RAM which turned out to hold about the same amount of uncompressed audio as what we got with 4 x 4Mb ROMs in DCS later. We rerouted the serial connection from the pinball system that would normally go to the 6809/Yamaha system Rich describes above and sent it to a PC that ran some C code I wrote, which would then translate it into MIDI commands to start and stop sounds on the Akai. Brian Eddy was the programmer working on the early Indiana Jones prototype at the time, I think, as I remember working on all this with him. The Akai, the PC and some speakers all sat on a roll-around cart that we called the "Digital Refrigerator" (I think Granner came up with that.)

Rich has the early details all right. When he moved on to his next project (sound board for Acclaim, I think for Batman video game), Ed Keenan and I added stuff for several years, usually with Ed writing the DSP code on the Analog Devices 2105 and me writing the front end tools in C for the composers. I will also concur that some of the music and sound packages for the 6809/Yamaha had a level of musical complexity and subtlety in terms of interactivity with the game play that has only recently been matched with things like Fmod and Wwyse.

One detail is that in these early days, the only commercial tool that was viable for editing digital audio was Sound Tools from Digidesign, that ran on a Mac. We needed development hardware that ran on PCs, so we got some very early digital audio cards from a company in Minnesota, and I wrote a super basic GUI based editor program that let the composers cut up the music into segments and loops. The nature of the CODEC is that loops had to happen on frame boundaries of 256 samples, so the audio editor had to know about that and have tools to preview loops. After a year or so we found a commercial audio editing program that ran on PC and the company that made it added a feature that would let us constrain the size of loops and selected regions of audio so it would line up with CODEC frame boundaries.

The "stock" DCS system could play four channels or tracks at once. One was usually reserved for music and three for sound effects.

The first mod that Ed K. and I added was an additional single channel of pitch-changeable audio so we could do the engine sound for Cruis'n USA. I think we had four looping engine samples that we pitch-changed and cross-faded based on sound calls from the game. Then we added a lot of realtime controls to try to get back to some of the things that the 6809/Yamaha system had: ducking, fixed channels for important sounds, priority system, track allocation so that N channels could be used for a family of sounds, cross-fades, chained sound calls so that one sound call chain on to another automatically, etc.

The final incarnation of DCS was what first shipped in War Gods. Instead of ROMs, all the sound banks were stored on the game's hard drive (War Gods was first hard drive based game in Chicago for us). This allowed a custom sound effects bank to be loaded for each level, each character, etc. It also streamed stereo un-compressed audio off the hard drive during game play, so all the background music was near CD quality (I think we used 22 kHz 16-bit) stereo and could be 3 to 5 minutes long (really no limit) with no looping. It used the newer Analog Devices 2115 DSP chip, and had stereo output, and sounds could be panned from within a playlist the composer set up, or controlled in real time from the game code using sound calls.

The final shepherd of all this was Andy Eloff, who took over all the audio work when Ed and I went on to working on other stuff. Andy was also the person who set up the first sound system for the new PC-based system, the first use of which I think was Brian Eddy's Arctic Thunder.

The first pins to use DCS were Indiana Jones and Star Trek. The first versions of the audio compression CODEC were a little brittle, and we had a bug with the static RAM chips that stored the lookup tables for the decompression due to some ground bounce issues on early versions of the PCB (more trivia - as I recall, the first DCS PCB was the first 4-layer board we had ever made, and that SRAM was running faster than stuff used on other boards, so our usual layout methods weren't working -- Cary Mednick was the wizard who helped get that all working). When the SRAM would bounce, the DCS board would emit a full volume screeching sound that was not unlike having a pencil stuck in your ear... leading some wise guy to cut out some photocopies of pencils and tape them on Indy's ears on the backglass on the test machine. :-) The first videos to use it were Mortal Kombat 2, Cruis'n and Killer Instinct (which was developed by Rare in the UK, with Midway building and distributing). In a fun "circle of life" moment, I got to "reboot" Killer Instinct at Xbox a few years back -- it was pretty successful and people still ask us to keep working on it, maybe someday --  and I may be the only person involved with that who knew that Ed Boon used to call "Killer Instinct" by "Smelly Buttstink" :-) Revolution X also used DCS. Granner can regail us with the fun scramble he had to do to create a 6809/Yamaha package in record short time for Twilight Zone because DCS wasn't ready in time.

Attached is one of the only photos I can find handily from that era... me editing some audio. Somewhere I have some saved clips from a few magazines that ran articles that probably have some better photos. When I took over leadership for Rare as part of Microsoft, the audio guys at Rare pulled out of some ancient storage closet a paper copy of a FAX (!) that I had sent them in 1992 or 1993 during Killer Instinct development explaining how to get the system up and running. I have a pic of it somewhere, will have to look. There is also a DCS board from KI on display in one of the glass display cases at Rare. Somewhat amazingly, a couple of the guys who worked on Killer Instinct audio are still there working on games for us!

Also attached is a Polaroid of perhaps one of the greatest moments in Williams/Midway sound department history, when the sewer backed up underneath the carpet in the "sound studio" (a room with shag carpet and a desk made from plywood and 2x4s I think). This would be 1991 to 1993 era I think. We had to have plumbers jack-hammer the cement floor and put in a new drain or something. We never quite got the smell out of the room, but soon after moved down the hall past the model/machine shop down by the mo-cap studio. This is the room in which Rich and others would do all the speech editing on the CVSD system he described. Rich also forgot to mention that there was only one little piece of hardware with the CVSD system in it that you could use to preview how things would sound. The audio from the Mac was routed into a little breadboard (finicky!) with a CVSD chip on it so you could hear how it would sound in the game. It sat in a metal box with paisley contact paper on it and I think was called The Paisley Beast. There was also a single box for the ADPCM based system too. (The ADPCM system was four channels, BTW, and T2 was indeed the first to use the ADPCM version. The CVSD system was one channel and there was also a single channel 8-bit DAC for playing sounds deemed important enough to get precious ROM space for a mostly uncompressed sound e.g. the punches in MK1).
